<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: About
Universe</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: About Universe' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, about, universe" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> About Universe</h1>
<p>UniVerse is one of a family of Database Management Systems
descended from a product called PICK.</p>
<p>In the late sixties, the improbably named Dick Pick, founder of
Pick Systems Inc., was developing systems for the American armed
forces. He designed the remarkably intuitive and practical system
which he gave his name. Sadly, Dick died recently.</p>
<p>His achievement became one of the IT industries best kept
secrets: widely used by a remarkably loyal user community, but
unheard of outside its own customer base. This was despite a number
of companies seizing upon PICK's basic design as being suitable for
their own databsae products. McDonnel Douglas, the aviation giant
with a strong IT arm, produce a version known as 'Reality'. The
French IN2 company cleverly called theirs 'IN2'. Prime Computer
Inc., now a subsidiary of Computervision, released first 'Prime
INFORMATION' and then 'PI/OPEN'. Cosmos developed an excellent DOS
based product for PC's called 'Revelation' (and latterly 'Advanced
Revelation' for Windows), and of course VMark brought the first
Unix implementation to market in the form of UniVerse.</p>
<p>PICK was originally a complete operating system, running the
machine it was installed on: and some of its derivatives took the
same form. However, this tended to limit the customers in the use
of their hardware, and it must be admitted that whatever PICK's
strengths as a DBMS, it was a clunky operating system. When Prime
released their product, they implemented it under their existing
operating system, but as this was the remarkable but still
proprietary 'PRIMOS' it was not a huge step forward in open
systems. Cosmos and later VMark capitalised on this weakness by
providing PICK-like products for the world's two most popular
platforms: DOS/Windows based PC's and Unix based servers and
mini-computers.</p>
<p>VMark adopted an agressive marketing position, selling UniVerse
not only as a candidate for the development of new corporate
systems, but also as an escape route to users of other PICK systems
previously wedded to particular hardware manufacturers. By allowing
them to port their systems, and the investment those systems
contained, to a ubiquituous Unix platform, they hoped to win
business from the enormous base of existing PICK clients. In this,
they achieved considerable success. It is for this reason that when
creating UniVerse 'accounts' (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('about-unix.html')">UniVerse and UNIX</span> below), you are
offered different 'flavours' of the product, compatible with what
is sometimes called 'generic' PICK, Prime INFORMATION, Reality,
IN2, and PI/OPEN, as well as VMark's own synthesis of the best
elements of each (in their view) which they christened 'IDEAL'.</p>

</body>
</html>
