<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: UniVerse and
UNIX</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: UniVerse and UNIX' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, universe, and, unix" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> UniVerse and UNIX</h1>
<h2>Accounts</h2>
<p>A UniVerse account is a UNIX directory containing what might be
termed the basic UniVerse 'file set'.</p>
<p>The easiest way to create a UniVerse account is to create an
empty UNIX directory, <code>cd</code> to it, and enter the 'uv'
command to invoke UniVerse. The UniVerse <code>bin</code> directory
contains its executable: if it is not on your path, you will have
to enter the full path to the command: something like
<code>/universe/bin/uv.</code></p>
<p>UniVerse will display:</p>
<p><code>This is not a valid UniVerse account.<br />
Would you like to make it one?</code></p>
<p>Enter a <code>Y</code> in reply, and you will be offered a
choice of Universe 'flavours' (see above: <span class="link"
onclick="_goto('about.html')">About UniVerse</span>). My own
background is in Prime INFORMATION, and that is the flavour used by
the EDS team at the Cape of Good Hope bank who form the immediate
audience for this guide, so I shall assume you choose the Prime
INFORMATION flavour: the differences, though, are generally
minor.</p>
<p>A few indecipherable messages will scroll past your screen as
UniVerse copies its basic 'file set' into its account, and you will
be left at the UniVerse <code>&gt;</code> prompt you will soon grow
to love.</p>
<p>At this point, it might be instructive to have a peek at the
UNIX directory underlying this UniVerse account. You will discover
at this point that none of the UNIX commands you have spent years
coming to terms with work from the UniVerse prompt (with one or two
minor exceptions) as UniVerse has its own command language. The
first command in this language you will now learn: <code>SH</code>
opens a UNIX command shell from 'inside' UniVerse. Enter this
command know, and at the Unix prompt enter the 'ls' command to take
a look.</p>
<p>You will notice six five files and a directory. The files are
<code>VOC</code>, <code>D_VOC</code>, <code>VOCLIB</code>,
<code>D_VOCLIB</code>, and <code>D_&amp;SAVEDLISTS&amp;</code>: the
directory <code>&amp;SAVEDLISTS&amp;</code>. By now you will have
noticed several unsettling things:</p>
<p>1. UniVerse commands and filenames are almost entirely in UPPER
CASE. Later you will also discover that the keywords and variable
names in its programming language Universe Basic are also in upper
case. This is a surprise and sometimes a problem for UNIX people,
whose 'caps lock' key has usually rusted over from lack of use. Get
used to it.</p>
<p>The &amp; character appears appears in two of these names: in
fact, it is a favourite of PICK people and appears in the names of
many system files, So much so that the UK's leading Prime
INFORMATION software house was called &amp;Ampersand Systems Ltd.
Be careful when typing these names under UNIX to prefix the &amp;
symbols with a backslash, thus:
<code>\&amp;SAVEDLISTS\&amp;</code>. You will kick off a lot of
phantom processes (which is what &amp; is used for under UNIX)
until you get used to this.</p>
<p>3. You had to go to UNIX to get a view of the physical structure
of the underlying directory. This is because UniVerse takes a
completely different view of what is going on: instead of five UNIX
files and one UNIX directory, it can see three UniVerse files
complete with 'dictionaries'. What this means you will discover
soon, but for now the distinction is worth bearing in mind. UNIX
and UniVerse 'files' are related, but are not one to one and not
even always under the same names. For this reason, tinkering with
the contents of a UniVerse account from UNIX usually causes
problems, as UNIX doesn't understand UniVerse and tends to trample
across its carefully laid structures: take care until you know how
the two systems relate.</p>
<p>Don't forget to enter the UNIX <code>exit</code> command to
close the UNIX shell and return to UniVerse...</p>

</body>
</html>
