<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: The Dictionary
Dictionary</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: The Dictionary Dictionary' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, the, dictionary, dictionary" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> The Dictionary Dictionary</h1>
<p>I have already mentioned that you can apply most commands to
dictionary files as easily as to data files. <code>LIST</code>
itself is no exception. Try this:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST DICT
CUSTOMER.INVOICES</strong></code></p>
<pre>
DICT CUSTOMER.INVOICES    17:51:53  08-13-99  Page 1

               Type &amp;
Field......... Field. Field........ Conversion.. Column......... Output Depth &amp;
Name.......... Number Definition... Code........ Heading........ Format Assoc..

@ID            D    0                            InvNum          6R     S
CUSTOMER.NAME  D    1                            Customer Name   15T    S
WIDE.CUSTOMER. D    1                            Customer Name   50T    S
NAME
PRODUCT        D    2                            Product         20T    S
UNIT.PRICE     D    3               MD20P        Unit Price      10R    S
QUANTITY       D    4                            Quantity        10R    S
VALUE          I      UNIT.PRICE *  MD20P        Value           10R    S
                      QUANTITY

7 records listed.
</pre>
<p>Here you can see, in a single enquiry, all the dictionary
records you have defined. An interesting point, though, is that in
order to format an enquiry like this, <code>LIST</code> requires a
dictionary. After all, how does it know that the title of the first
column is 'Field Name'? And indeed, how did it know which columns
to display, given that you specified no field names after your
<code>LIST</code> command?</p>
<p>The answer to both questions is that every dictionary has a
dictionary. But does this mean that that dictionary in turn must
have a dictionary, and so on in an infinite series of dictionaries?
No. The thing is, while the format of each data file is unique, and
so must have a unique dictionary, the dictionary files themselves
are all structured exactly the same way: and you've learnt this
structure in the last few sections. This means that they can all
share the same dictionary. It is called <code>DICT.DICT</code>.
Take a look:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST DICT.DICT</strong></code></p>
<pre>
DICT.DICT    18:00:34  08-13-99  Page 1

               Type &amp;
Field......... Field. Field........ Conversion.. Column......... Output Depth &amp;
Name.......... Number Definition... Code........ Heading........ Format Assoc..

@ID            D    0                            Field           14L    S
                                                 Name
FIELD          D    0                            Field           14L    S
                                                 Name
ID             D    0                                            15L    S
ITEM.ID        D    0                                            10T    S
KEYR           D    0                                            15R    S
KEY            D    0                                            15L    S
CODE           D    1                                            4L     S
F1             D    1                                            35L    S
EXP            D    2                            FIELD # or EXPR 30T    S
                                                 ESSION
A2             D    2                                            3R     S
DATA.FILE      D    2                            DATA.FILE.NAME  30T    S
LOC.           D    2                            LOC.            3T     S
LOC.L          D    2                            LOCATION        40T    S
LOC            D    2                            LOCATION        15T    S
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>This listing goes on for a number of pages, and is not as
friendly as it might be, largely because UniVerse themselves do not
follow the rule I recommended whereby each field is given a single
<code>D</code> type entry to define it. Don't ask me why: I've told
them often enough, but they've stopped answering my mail.</p>
<p>But doesn't <code>DICT.DICT</code> also require a dictionary?
Well, because it <em>is</em> a dictionary, it follows the same
structure that any dictionary follows. And the dictionary of a
dictionary is... <code>DICT.DICT</code>. In other words,
<code>DICT.DICT</code> <em>is its own dictionary.</em> You can
prove this curious fact to yourself by sneaking a look at its
<code>VOC</code> record:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>ED VOC DICT.DICT</strong><br />
3 lines long.<br />
<br />
----: <strong>P</strong><br />
0001: F<br />
0002: /work/universe/DICT.DICT<br />
0003: /work/universe/DICT.DICT<br />
Bottom at line 3.<br />
----: <strong>Q</strong><br />
&gt;</code></p>
<p>And there it is: field 2 (which points to the data file) and
field 3 (which points to the dictionary file) both point to the
same file (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('voc-files.html')">File Pointers</span> for information
about file pointers). This neat device precludes the need for an
infinite series of dictionaries.</p>
<p>To find out how <code>LIST</code> decides which fields to show
when you enter a <code>LIST DICT filename</code> command
<em>without</em> specifying field names (as you did above), check
out the <code>@</code> record in <code>DICT.DICT</code> (for
information about how the <code>@</code> phrase determines the
default enquiry, see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('dictionaries-phrases.html')">Phrases</span>):</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>ED DICT CUSTOMER.INVOICES @</strong><br />
The file "DICT.DICT" is read-only and cannot be updated.<br />
3 lines long.<br />
<br />
----: <strong>P</strong><br />
0001: PH<br />
0002: BY FIELD.NO BY TYPE ID.SUP FIELD FIELD.TYPE FIELD.DEF
FIELD.CONV FIELD.HE AD FIELD.FMT FIELD.ASSOC_<br />
0003: HEADING "'F' 'T' Page 'PL'"<br />
Bottom at line 3.<br />
----: <strong>Q</strong><br />
&gt;</code></p>
<p>Several things to notice here.</p>
<p>1. The field names, and the <code>BY</code> clauses, determine
what you see when you type <code>LIST DICT filename...</code>.</p>
<p>2. A trick I haven't mentioned before: the use of a
<code>_</code> character at the end of line 2 to allow the phrase
to continue on line 3: which you can use in any phrase which gets
rather long.</p>
<p>3. The <code>HEADING</code> clause, which puts a custom written
heading at the top of your enquiry. I'll explain this, along with
other clever things the query language can do, in the section on
RetrieVe.</p>
<p>4. The <code>...read-only...</code> message: as you can see from
the paths on fields 2 and 3, <code>DICT.DICT</code> points to the
central UniVerse directory. If you changed it, you'd change the way
<em>every</em> dictionary is displayed, not just in this account,
but in <em>every account on your system</em>. UniVerse only gives
toys like this to the Unix system administrator <code>root</code>.
If you don't fully understand what <code>DICT.DICT</code> does, you
shouldn't edit it. If you do, you wont anyway.</p>

</body>
</html>
