<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: *: Other dictionary
record types</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: *: Other dictionary record types' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, *, other, dictionary, record, types" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> *: Other dictionary record types</h1>
<h2>A and S types</h2>
<p>You may sometimes come across dictionary records with types of
<code>A</code> or <code>S</code>. They play roles similar to
<code>D</code> and <code>I</code> type dictionary records, but are
supported largely for compatability reasons: some forms of PICK
(see <span class="link" onclick="_goto('about.html')">About
UniVerse</span> above) used these instead of <code>D</code> and
<code>I</code>. If you come across them, you'll find their layout
described in the UniVerse documentation: but they are both less
friendly and less efficient than the types I have already
described, and have no extra functionality. My advice would be that
if you find yourself having to change one, do so by replacing it
with a <code>D</code> or <code>I</code>.</p>
<h2>X types</h2>
<p>Like <code>X</code> type records in the <code>VOC</code> file,
<code>X</code> type dictionary records are not designed to be used
as words in commands. They are there to store data. For instance,
many files have records keyed by sequential numbers. In order to
add a new record to such a file, you must find the lowest unused
number you can use as a key. You could do so by enquiring on the
file itself, but this would add enormous overhead. Instead, most
programmers add a record to the dictionary of the file, called (by
convention) <code>&amp;NEXT.AVAILABLE&amp;</code>, which is a type
X and carries the lowest unused number on its second field. This is
locked, read, updated, and unlocked by every process which adds a
record to the main file.</p>
<p>One or two <code>X</code> types are harmless, but as with
<code>X</code> type records in your VOC file, bear in mind that
each one increases the size of a file crucial to the performance of
your system, as well as 'taking up' a word which might otherwise be
available as part of your command language. It is therefore
advisable to use them sparingly. If you find yourself setting up
ten <code>X</code> types on a dictionary, consider setting up a
separate UniVerse file for the values, as it seems likely you will
be dealing with a new form of 'entity' altogether, rather than
merely a chance administrative detail of your main data file.</p>

</body>
</html>
