<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe:
Introduction</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Introduction' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, introduction" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Introduction</h1>
<p><em>Universe</em> is a <em>commercial unix-based pick-derived
post-relational multiuser database management system</em>.</p>
<p>Let's take it a bit at a time:</p>
<p><em>database management system</em>: It's a program which allows
users to store, update, and report on large quantities of data.</p>
<p><em>multiuser</em>: It usually runs on a biggish central
computer to which a <em>number</em> of users connect using their
PC's or terminals and access data simultaneously.</p>
<p><em>post-relational</em>: It has a different way of organising
data to the ubiquitous 'relational databases' such as, say,
Oracle.</p>
<p><em>pick-derived</em>: It is one of a family of databases based
on the original 'Pick' database, designed by the legendary Dick
Pick.</p>
<p><em>unix-based</em>: It was the first and, at time of writing,
still the only pick-derived database to run under Unix.</p>
<p><em>commercial</em>: It's copyrighted by a company called VMark
and sold for money.</p>
<p>My first job in IT was as a programmer working with another
pick-derived database called <em>Prime INFORMATION</em>, which ran
on Prime's own minicomputers. I gradually learnt that Pick was
extremely popular with its surprisingly large user base, but little
known elsewhere: and consequently Pick programming was something of
an esoteric skill to have acquired. At a number of sites I found
myself providing consultancy and training to developers familiar
with more mainstream technologies where they had taken on
responsibility for supporting Pick products.</p>
<p><em>Life, the Universe, and Everything</em> is a set of notes on
Universe I wrote in 1999 while training developers from Electronic
Data Systems working at the Cape of Good Hope Bank in Cape Town.
They were written rather quickly, and while have reformatted them
to suit <strong>www.mannyneira.com</strong>, I have not otherwise
checked or edited them: and indeed no longer have access to either
Universe documentation, or a Universe system to play on. They are
therefore offered to anyone who might find them either of practical
use, or historical interest, but without any promise of accuracy or
responsibility for the consequences of inaccuracies. If you find
any mistakes, be kind and let me know at <a href=
"mailto:me@mannyneira.com">mailbox@mannyneira.com</a></p>
<p>Republishing these notes reminds me that I foolishly allowed
myself to lose touch with the old Cape of Good Hope Bank team. If
any of them come across this, and feel like getting in touch, I'd
love to hear from them too.</p>
<p><em>Manny Neira, 3rd February 2006</em></p>
<h2>Original 1999 introduction</h2>
<p>This guide provides an introduction to VMark's UniVerse Database
Management System.</p>
<p>It does not aim to provide a detailed reference guide, as the
Universe documentation (which is available on-line in 'Acrobat
Reader' format) does this extremely well. Rather, it aims to build
a conceptual model, a framework of ideas, which should allow you to
approach the mass of detail in VMark's manual with greater
confidence and understanding.</p>
<p>The guide has been written for developers already experienced in
other languages or development environments, and thus assumes a
thorough understanding of IT. It also assumes a very basic
competence in Unix, sufficient to log in, create a directory, move
from one directory to another, and so on: but this is not a
strenuous requirement as it would not be difficult to exceed the
Unix expertise of the author. It does not assume any knowledge of
UniVerse, so should suit both beginners and those who have already
spent sufficient time with the product to become confused.</p>
<p>The guide was originally written for my colleagues in the EDS
Africa team at the Cape of Good Hope Bank in Cape Town, South
Africa: but contains nothing which is relevant only to them. We use
UniVerse release 9 on IBM AIX servers, but again, most of the
ground covered will be relevant to UniVerse users irrespective of
version and platform. What the guide may contain, however, is a
certain amount of nonsense: having been prepared quickly and with
too much reliance on my memory of working with UniVerse and systems
like it. For this, I can only ask tolerance and kindly
correction.</p>
<p><em>Manny Neira, 23rd June 1999</em></p>

</body>
</html>
