<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: The Command
Stack</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: The Command Stack' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, the, command, stack" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> The Command Stack</h1>
<p>UniVerse keeps a 'history' of all the commands you have entered
at the UniVerse command prompt. To demonstrate it, it is helpful to
first enter a few commands. Try the following:</p>
<p><code>DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
DISPLAY This is my second command<br />
DISPLAY This is my third command</code></p>
<p>(The <code>DISPLAY</code> command is explained above: see
<span class="link" onclick="_goto('prompt.html')">The Command
Prompt</span> above.)</p>
<p>To see you command history, enter <code>.L</code>, which will
display a list something like this:</p>
<p><code>03 DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my second command<br />
01 DISPLAY This is my third command</code></p>
<p>This is called your 'command stack', and all the commands to
manipulate it, like the <code>,L</code> command above, begin with a
dot.</p>
<p>You can repeat your last command by entering <code>.X</code>, or
indeed any command by entering <code>.Xn</code>, where n is the
commands position in the stack, the most recent command always
being 1. For instance, to repeat the command <code>DISPLAY This is
my second command</code>, enter <code>.X2</code>. Try it.</p>
<p>If you now enter <code>.L</code> again, you will see:</p>
<p><code>04 DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
03 DISPLAY This is my second command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my third command<br />
01 DISPLAY This is my second command</code></p>
<p>Notice that when you repeated the second command, it became the
most recent command, and so appeared once more at position 1 in the
stack. This is how the stack generally behaves: as you enter new
commands, the older commands are each gradually shuffled down the
command stack. Only when you enter <code>.X</code> does it not
generate a new entry in the command stack, because you are merely
repeating the last command, so UniVerse decides to ignore it.</p>
<p>Take care. After a while you will find yourself 'remembering'
where the commands will be and able to enter <code>.X3</code> to
reexecute the command you issued three commands ago, but to begin
with always enter <code>.L</code> to list the commands before
reexecuting any but your last command: many an overconfident
developer has deleted the source of the program he is working on,
or cleared a file of carefully loaded data, by guessing the
position of the command he wanted in the stack incorrectly.</p>
<p>You can delete the most recent entry in the stack by entering
<code>.D</code>, or indeed delete any entry by entering
<code>,Dn</code> where n is the entry's number. Try entering
<code>.D3</code> to delete entry three, and then <code>.L</code> to
redisplay the stack:</p>
<p><code>03 DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my third command<br />
01 DISPLAY This is my second command</code></p>
<p>To 'recall' an older command to the head of the stack, enter
<code>.Rn</code>, where n is again the number of the stack entry to
recall. Try recalling entry 2 with <code>.R2</code>, and relisting
the stack with <code>.L</code>:</p>
<p><code>03 DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my third command<br />
01 DISPLAY This is my second command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my third command</code></p>
<p>Like <code>.X</code>, <code>.R</code> brings an old command to
the top of the stack: but it doesn't run it again. You would most
often do this because you wished to change the command before
running it again. To change the most recent command in the stack,
enter <code>.C/oldstring/newstring</code>. For instance, you could
change the word 'third' to '3rd' by entering
<code>.C/third/3rd</code>. Try it, and redisplay the stack with
<code>.L</code>:</p>
<p><code>03 DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my third command<br />
01 DISPLAY This is my second command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my 3rd command</code></p>
<p>In principle, you could change any entry by using
<code>.Cn</code> in place of <code>.C</code> to indicate it's
number, but in practice its safer to use <code>.Rn</code> first to
recall the entry, and then <code>.C</code>.</p>
<p>If the command you wish to change contains the '/' character,
then you can use a different delimiter in your change command: the
command <code>.C!third!3rd</code> would have had exactly the same
effect as the one you used above. In fact, you can use any of the
following characters: !@#$%&amp;*/\:=+-?(){}[]`'.,|, so you can
generally find one which doesn't appear in your command.</p>
<p>If the same string appears more than once in your command, and
you wish to change all the occurences in one go, append
<code>/G</code>: the 'G' standing for 'global'. For instance, type
<code>.C/m/!/g</code> and then <code>.L</code>:</p>
<p><code>03 DISPLAY This is my first command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is my third command<br />
01 DISPLAY This is my second command<br />
02 DISPLAY This is !y 3rd co!!and</code></p>
<p>To add something to the end of a command, you can use <code>.A
extrabit</code> (or <code>.An extrabit</code> to add something to
command n in the stack); and finally, for UNIX programmers having
trouble remembering to enter commands and filenames in upper case,
you can use <code>.U</code> (or <code>.Un</code>) to convert an
entire command to upper case.</p>
<p>The number of commands kept in the stack is depends on the way
your copy of UniVerse has been configured, but is usually about
100. Entering <code>.L</code> will show you up to 20: to see more,
enter <code>.Ln</code> where n is the number of commands you wish
to see.</p>

</body>
</html>
