<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: The Command
Prompt</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: The Command Prompt' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, the, command, prompt" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> The Command Prompt</h1>
<p>If you have not yet created a Universe account, do: see
<span class="link" onclick="_goto('about-unix.html')">Universe and
UNIX</span> above.</p>
<p>If you have, <code>cd</code> to the directory housing the
account, and start Universe.</p>
<p>The command to start Universe account is <code>uv</code>. The
UniVerse <code>bin</code> directory contains this executable: if it
is not on your path, you will have to enter the full path: it will
be something like <code>/universe/bin/uv.</code></p>
<p>This will bring you to the Universe prompt:</p>
<p><code>&gt;</code></p>
<p>At this prompt, you can enter commands. The following commands
are worth learning first:</p>
<p><code>QUIT</code></p>
<p>Before you learn anything else, learn how to get back to UNIX
from UniVerse: simply enter <code>QUIT</code>. Some people find
themselves logged off their server on entering <code>QUIT</code>,
but this is not because the command itself logs you off. It only
happens where a friendly system administrator has devised a command
file which first invokes UniVerse and then logs out. It means that
while you are in UniVerse, the UNIX command file is still running:
and as soon as you return to UNIX it completes by logging you
off.</p>
<p><code>LO</code></p>
<p>Unless you are using a system which logs you out when you type
<code>QUIT</code> (see above), <code>QUIT</code> will only return
you to UNIX. If you plan to log off the system entirely, you can do
so directly from UniVerse by entering <code>LO</code>.</p>
<p><code>SH</code></p>
<p>This command has already been mentioned (see <span class="link"
onclick="_goto('about-unix.html')">UniVerse and Unix</span> above).
It merely suspends UniVerse and opens a UNIX shell. It is bad
practise to log out of this shell, as it doesn't give UniVerse a
chance to 'shut down' tidily (releasing locks, clearing file I/O
buffers and so on): always <code>exit</code> back to UniVerse
first. Within the shell, you can carry out most UNIX functions,
though you should not recursively start UniVerse again, and you
should bear in mind that even if you use <code>cd</code> to move to
a different directory, on leaving the shell you will be returned to
your original UNIX directory and your original UniVerse
account.</p>
<p><code>LOGTO</code></p>
<p><code>LOGTO</code> takes the place of UNIX's <code>cd</code>
command in that it moves you from one UniVerse account to another,
in much the way that <code>cd</code> moves you from one UNIX
directory to another.</p>
<p>However, it works slightly differently in that it doesn't accept
pathnames to indicate your destination: the syntax is simply
<code>LOGTO accountname</code>. This is because, as was explained
during the description of UniVerse's heirarchical structure (see
<span class="link" onclick="_goto('about-paradigm.html')">The
UniVerse Paradigm</span> above), UniVerse accounts are not
recursive: that is to say, as far as UniVerse is concerned, no
account contains another account. UniVerse keeps a single central
list of all the accounts on a system, and when you specify the
account name you wish to go to, it finds the UNIX path from this
list. Even if one UniVerse account has been created in a
subdirectory of another (note: not good practice), UniVerse does
not recognise any relationship between them, merely two accounts at
different paths.</p>
<p>Here lies one of the examples of something I mentioned earlier:
the risks of applying UNIX commands to UniVerse structures (see
<span class="link" onclick="_goto('about-unix.html')">UniVerse and
UNIX</span> above). If you move a directory containing a UniVerse
account using the UNIX <code>mv</code> command, all may seem well.
If you <code>cd</code> to the new pathname and invoke UniVerse, it
will work. However, if you try to <code>LOGTO</code> the account
you moved from UniVerse, the command will fail. This is because
UNIX is not aware of UniVerse's internal controls, and will not
update it's internal list of account locations. This, you must do
yourself using the UNIX Administrator's menu, which is
unfortunately outside the scope of this document. Refer to the
UniVerse documentation for more information on this point.</p>
<p><code>SET.TERM.TYPE</code></p>
<p>Each different kind of dumb terminal has it's own instruction
set for doing things like displaying text at particular screen
locations, or displaying text in bold, and so on. In order to cope
with these, UniVerse must know which kind of terminal you are
using. If, as is now increasingly likely, you are using a PC based
terminal emulator, it must know which kind of terminal it is
emulating.</p>
<p>To set the terminal type, you can enter
<code>SET.TERM.TYPE</code>, and enter a <code>?</code> when asked
for your terminal type. UniVerse will then display a list of those
it supports. Select your terminal from this list.</p>
<p>It would be a good idea to do this before trying any of the
examples in the remainder of this course: they all assume that your
terminal type has been set up correctly. This terminal type
definition lasts until you leave UniVerse: when you return to
UniVerse you will have to use this command again, though there are
ways to automate 'start up' commands of this kind, as you will
learn later.</p>
<p><code>HELP</code></p>
<p>UniVerse boasts an extremely comprehensive on-line help system,
similar to the UNIX <code>man</code> facility. To get information
about a command, enter <code>HELP commandname</code>. For instance,
you could enter <code>HELP LOGTO</code> to read about the
<code>LOGTO</code> command, or even the rather desperate sounding
<code>HELP HELP</code> to learn about the help system itself. This
on-line manual also covers the statements in the UniVerse Basic
programming language: a point we shall return to when the language
is discussed later.</p>
<p><code>DISPLAY</code></p>
<p>To display something on the screen, enter the command
<code>DISPLAY string</code>, as in <code>DISPLAY Hello Mum!</code>.
This a useful enough command, but not tremendously important: I
explain it because I will be asking you to enter it later as part
of some worked examples on other subjects.</p>

</body>
</html>
