<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Listing
Records</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Listing Records' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, listing, records" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Listing Records</h1>
<h2>An example file</h2>
<p>To illustrate the query language, we need a file to enquire
about. The examples in this section will use
<code>COPY.OF.VOC</code>, which we created to illustrate the use of
indexes (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('dictionaries-indexing.html')">Indexing Fields</span>).</p>
<p>If you did not follow the examples in that section, you can
create this file as follows:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>CREATE.FILE COPY.OF.VOC DYNAMIC</strong><br />
Creating file "COPY.OF.VOC" as Type 30.<br />
Creating file "D_COPY.OF.VOC" as Type 3, Modulo 1, Separation
2.<br />
Added "@ID", the default record for RetrieVe, to
"D_COPY.OF.VOC".<br />
&gt;<strong>COPY FROM VOC TO COPY.OF.VOC ALL</strong><br />
<br />
825 records copied.<br />
&gt;<strong>COPY FROM DICT VOC TO DICT COPY.OF.VOC ALL
OVERWRITING</strong><br />
<br />
19 records copied.<br />
&gt;</code></p>
<p>You also learnt earlier (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('dictionaries-phrases.html')">Phrases</span>) that the
<code>@</code> phrase is used as to provide 'default' parameters to
<code>LIST</code> instructions if they are entered without
parameters. In this section, though, this would complicate the
examples. We must remove the <code>@</code> phrase from the
dictionary of <code>COPY.OF.VOC</code> to avoid this. The
<code>DELETE</code> command used below is straightforward, and
explained fully later during our discussion of the TCL command
language. For now, enter:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>DELETE DICT COPY.OF.VOC @</strong><br />
<br />
<br />
1 records DELETEd.<br />
&gt;</code></p>
<p>Your file is now ready to enquire on.</p>
<h2>A basic list</h2>
<p>As you have already discovered, to list the records in a file
you need only enter the command <code>LIST</code> followed by a
file name. For instance:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC 10:05:46  08-19-99  PAGE 1
VOC.........

F9
PRINT.ADMIN
TEST.PARAGRA
PH
COMO
NOHEAD
LT
BREAK.VERB
SUBO
ALL.MATCH
INQUIRING
LIST.ME
IN
MAP.VERB
CONSYS.REPOR
TS
MAKE.DEMO.FI
LES
STATS
PTIME
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>There are 800 or so records in this file, so <code>LIST</code>
will pause at the bottom of every page. You may see the next page
by pressing ENTER, or abandon the enquiry by pressing
<code>Q</code>. If you want the enquiry to run to its last page
(perhaps in order to see totals) without pausing after every page,
press <code>N</code>. For now, press <code>Q</code>.</p>
<h2>Listing fields</h2>
<p>This listing displays only record keys. To display other fields,
simply add their names to the command:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC
SIZE</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE 10:32:37  08-19-99  PAGE 1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
PRINT.ADMIN     PA      Paragraph                                25
TEST.PARAGRA    PA      PA                                       64
PH
COMO            V       Verb - Control copying of                31
                        command output to files
NOHEAD          K       Keyword - Do not print a                  5
                        banner page
LT              K       Keyword - "Less Than" operator            3
BREAK.VERB      V       Verb - Enable or disable INTR,           12
                        STOP, SUSP, and BRK keys.
SUBO            V       Verb - Subtract OCTAL numbers            17
ALL.MATCH       K       Keyword - Specify that ALL                5
                        strings should match for
                        SEARCH/ESEARCH statement
INQUIRING       K       Keyword - Prompt for record               4
                        name
LIST.ME         S       Sentence - Return status of              11
                        all users with your login name
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<h2>Sorting</h2>
<p>The order in which these records appear is not, strictly
speaking, random, as it is reflects the order in which the records
are found in the physical groups, which in turn depends on the
hashing of the file (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('files.html')">UniVerse Files</span>). It is not though, as
some believe, the order in which the records were added: in fact it
has no logical meaning.</p>
<p>To sort your records by <code>fieldname</code>, add the words
<code>BY fieldname</code> to the end of your enquiry. To sort first
by <code>fieldname1</code> and within that by
<code>fieldname2</code>, add the words <code>BY fieldname1 BY
fieldname 2</code>. You can in fact chain as many sorts in this way
as you wish. This example sorts first by type, and then by key:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE BY
TYPE</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE SIZE DESC BY TYPE BY @ID 10:42:31  08-19-99  PAGE 1
VOC.........    TYPE    Length...    DESC..........................

F1              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 1 of
                                     any file
F10             D              12    Data descriptor for Field 10
                                     of any file
F2              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 2 of
                                     any file
F3              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 3 of
                                     any file
F4              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 4 of
                                     any file
F5              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 5 of
                                     any file
F6              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 6 of
                                     any file
F7              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 7 of
                                     any file
F8              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 8 of
                                     any file
F9              D              11    Data descriptor for Field 9 of
                                     any file
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>You can sort your records 'backwards' by using
<code>BY.DSND</code> ('by descending') in place of
<code>BY</code>.</p>
<p>An interesting footnote is that UniVerse provides a
<code>SORT</code> command which is identical to <code>LIST</code>
in every respect save one: it acts as if <code>BY @ID</code> had
been added to the end of the list of <code>BY</code> clauses. There
is, perhaps, little harm in it, but I generally recommend that
people do not use it, but use instead <code>LIST</code> and add the
required <code>BY @ID</code>. This is simply because the latter is
more descriptive and less easily misunderstood. For instance, if
you saw the command...</p>
<p><code>SORT COPY.OF.VOC BY TYPE</code></p>
<p>...would it be obvious to you that the file was being sorted by
both <code>TYPE</code> and <code>@ID</code>? The functionally
identical...</p>
<p><code>LIST COPY.OF.VOC BY TYPE BY @ID</code></p>
<p>...makes this inescapable.</p>
<h2>Sampling</h2>
<p>It is sometimes useful to enquire on a sample of the records in
your file. Just use the <code>SAMPLE n</code> keyword to list a
sample of <code>n</code> records. The records are the first
<code>n</code> encountered in the physical order they are stored in
the file. As explained above, this is not strictly random, but
usually might as well be. Be aware, though, that repeated
<code>SAMPLE</code> enquiries on the same file will not yield
different sets of records each time.</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE SAMPLE
3</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE SAMPLE 3 11:57:30  08-19-99  PAGE 1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
PRINT.ADMIN     PA      Paragraph                                25
TEST.PARAGRA    PA      PA                                       64
PH

Sample of 3 records listed.
&gt;
</pre>
<h2>Listing selectively</h2>
<p>If you wish to enquire on only a subset of the records in your
file, you can use the keyword <code>WITH</code> followed by your
criteria. For instance, if you were interested only in seeing
<code>M</code> types, you would enter the command:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE WITH TYPE =
'M'</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE WITH TYPE = "M" 12:00:46  08-19-99  PAGE 1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

CONV.ACCT.ME    M       Menu - UniVerse Account                  34
NU                      Importation
PRINT.ADMIN.    M       Menu - UniVerse Spooler                  35
MENU                    Administration
BASIC.CONT      M       Menu                                     31
SP.JOB          M       Menu                                     27
CONSYS.MENU     M       M                                        26
SP.MOD          M       Menu                                     27
ACCT.CONV       M       Menu                                     30
SP.STATUS       M       Menu                                     30
MENUS           M       MENU selector - Invoke the               31
                        MENU maintenance menu

9 records listed.
&gt;
</pre>
<p>The equal sign <code>=</code> is probably the most commonly
used, but still only one of many comparison operators you can use
in your criteria. Here is a list of the most popular, with
examples:</p>
<table>
<tr>
<td>
<p>Operator</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Example and Meaning</p>
</td>
<td>
<p>Synonyms</p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>=</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>TYPE = 'M'</code><br />
Type equal to 'M'</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>EQ</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>#</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>TYPE # 'M'</code><br />
Type not equal to 'M'</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>&lt;&gt;, &gt;;&lt;, NE</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>&gt;</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>SIZE &gt; 10</code><br />
Size greater than 10</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>GT, AFTER</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>&lt;</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>SIZE &lt; 10</code><br />
Size less than 10</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>LT, BEFORE</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>&gt;=</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>SIZE &gt;= 10</code><br />
Size greater than or equal to 10</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>=&gt;, GE</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>&lt;=</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>SIZE &lt;= 10</code><br />
Size less than or equal to 10</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>=&lt;, LE</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>LIKE</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>DESC LIKE ...PRINTER...</code><br />
Description with the word 'PRINTER' in it. Note that the '...'
strings act as wildcards</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>MATCHES MATCHING</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>UNLIKE</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>DESC UNLIKE ...PRINTER...</code><br />
Description without the word 'PRINTER' in it. Note that the '...'
strings act as wildcards</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>NOT.MATCHING</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
<tr>
<td>
<p><code>SPOKEN</code></p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>DESC SPOKEN 'SMITH'</code><br />
Description pronounced 'Smith'. Does phonetic matching, especially
useful with name searches, but less so here...</p>
</td>
<td>
<p><code>SAID, ~</code></p>
</td>
</tr>
</table>
<p>You can reverse any of these criteria using <code>NOT</code>:
but you don't normally need to, as most of the operators have
opposites in any case. For instance, <code>NOT TYPE = 'M'</code>
means the same as <code>TYPE # 'M'</code>,</p>
<p>More usefully, you can combine these criteria using the keywords
<code>AND</code> and <code>OR</code>. Joining two conditions with
<code>AND</code> means that they must <em>both</em> be true for the
record to be selected. Joining them with <code>OR</code> means that
<em>at least one</em> of them must be true.</p>
<p>UniVerse always evaluates <code>AND</code> links before
<code>OR</code> links: you need to be careful when combining
conditions to ensure that they mean to UniVerse what they mean to
you. For instance, consider the following criteria:</p>
<p><code>...WITH SIZE GT 100 AND TYPE = 'PA' OR TYPE =
'S'</code></p>
<p>What this criteria will do is select all the paragraphs more
than 100 bytes in length, and all the sentences regardless of their
lengths. Is this rather odd result what the developer wanted?
Probably not: it would seem more likely he was looking for long
sentences and paragraphs: ie. any sentence or paragraph more than
100 bytes long. He could have resolved the ambiguity with
brackets:</p>
<p><code>...WITH SIZE GT 100 AND (TYPE = 'PA' OR TYPE =
'S')</code></p>
<p>The meaning of this is obvious to both developer and
UniVerse.</p>
<p>Even if the original developer <em>had</em> intended, for some
reason, to choose long paragraphs and all sentences, he still wrote
poor code as it is difficult for maintenance programmers to tell
whether that was the intended result, or whether the condition
contains a bug. He would have been better to include the brackets
for clarity, even though they are redundant:</p>
<p><code>...WITH (SIZE GT 100 AND TYPE = 'PA') OR TYPE =
'S'</code></p>
<p>No question here what is intended.</p>
<h2>Totalling</h2>
<p>To total a numeric column, add the word <code>TOTAL</code>
before the appropriate field.</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC TOTAL
SIZE</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC TOTAL SIZE 10:46:25  08-19-99  PAGE 1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
PRINT.ADMIN     PA      Paragraph                                25
TEST.PARAGRA    PA      PA                                       64
PH
COMO            V       Verb - Control copying of                31
                        command output to files
NOHEAD          K       Keyword - Do not print a                  5
                        banner page
LT              K       Keyword - "Less Than" operator            3
BREAK.VERB      V       Verb - Enable or disable INTR,           12
                        STOP, SUSP, and BRK keys.
SUBO            V       Verb - Subtract OCTAL numbers            17
ALL.MATCH       K       Keyword - Specify that ALL                5
                        strings should match for
                        SEARCH/ESEARCH statement
INQUIRING       K       Keyword - Prompt for record               4
                        name
LIST.ME         S       Sentence - Return status of              11
                        all users with your login name
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>...to <em>see</em> your total, you'll need to get to the end of
the enquiry. Press <code>N</code> at the 'end of page' prompt to
skip all further pauses. The enquiry will flash all the pages past
your screen until it gets to...</p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC TOTAL SIZE 10:46:25  08-19-99  PAGE 88
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

                        LORRY for packing and
                        unpacking Universe files into
                        ASCII 'lorry' files
P.DET           V       Verb - UNASSIGN a physical               27
                        PRINTER from your task
LIST.ITEM       V       Verb - List complete records             37
                        in specified file
INFORM          K       Keyword - Display the spooler             5
                        job number of newly queued
                        jobs
BREAK.ON        K       Keyword - Specify BREAK                   4
                        conditions in a report
LISTPA          R       Remote - LIST the PARAGRAPHS             24
                        stored in the VOCABULARY file
CUSTOMERS       F       F                                        24
                                                          =========
                                                             21,211


824 records listed.
&gt;
</pre>
<h2>Setting breakpoints</h2>
<p>To break the report into sections, add the word
<code>BREAK.ON</code> before the appropriate field. This will force
a break whenever the field in question changes. Note that this will
produce meaningless results unless the records are sorted by the
field being broken on, so a sort <code>BY</code> the appropriate
field almost always accompanies a <code>BREAK.ON</code>. Note also
that totalled numeric fields automatically show subtotals at
breakpoints:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON TYPE DESC TOTAL SIZE
BY TYPE</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON TYPE DESC TOTAL SIZE BY TYPE 10:55:11  08-19-99  PAGE1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
F7              D       Data descriptor for Field 7 of           11
                        any file
F1              D       Data descriptor for Field 1 of           11
                        any file
F2              D       Data descriptor for Field 2 of           11
                        any file
F4              D       Data descriptor for Field 4 of           11
                        any file
F5              D       Data descriptor for Field 5 of           11
                        any file
F6              D       Data descriptor for Field 6 of           11
                        any file
F10             D       Data descriptor for Field 10             12
                        of any file
F8              D       Data descriptor for Field 8 of           11
                        any file
F3              D       Data descriptor for Field 3 of           11
                        any file
                **                                        ---------
                D                                               111

MANNY.BP.O      F       F                                        26
DICT.DICT       F       File - The DICTIONARY for all            51
                        uniVerse dictionaries in the
                        system
TEST1           F       F                                        16
CUSTOMER.INV    F       F                                        30
OICES
DICT.PICK       F       File - The DICTIONARY for all            51
                        Pick style uniVerse
                        dictionaries in the system
CONSYS.RESIZ    F       F                                        72
E.FILES
THISISALONGN    F       F                                        30
AME
INTEOD.UFD      F       F                                        28
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>(I've cheated here, for clarity omitting the page end prompt
between the first and second pages of the report. Depending on the
exact contents of your <code>VOC</code>, and thus your
<code>COPY.OF.VOC</code>, the first breakpoint will probably occur
somewhere after the first page.)</p>
<p>As you can see, <code>RetrieVe</code> puts a line of stars at
the end of each section. If you'd like some other visual marker
used instead, specify it in double quotes after your
<code>BREAK.ON</code>:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON "::::" TYPE DESC
TOTAL SIZE BY TYPE</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON "::::" TYPE DESC TOTAL SIZE BY TYPE 11:20:57  08-19-99
  PAGE 1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
F7              D       Data descriptor for Field 7 of           11
                        any file
F1              D       Data descriptor for Field 1 of           11
                        any file
F2              D       Data descriptor for Field 2 of           11
                        any file
F4              D       Data descriptor for Field 4 of           11
                        any file
F5              D       Data descriptor for Field 5 of           11
                        any file
F6              D       Data descriptor for Field 6 of           11
                        any file
F10             D       Data descriptor for Field 10             12
                        of any file
F8              D       Data descriptor for Field 8 of           11
                        any file
F3              D       Data descriptor for Field 3 of           11
                        any file
                ::::                                      ---------
                D                                               111

MANNY.BP.O      F       F                                        26
DICT.DICT       F       File - The DICTIONARY for all            51
                        uniVerse dictionaries in the
                        system
TEST1           F       F                                        16
CUSTOMER.INV    F       F                                        30
OICES
DICT.PICK       F       File - The DICTIONARY for all            51
                        Pick style uniVerse
                        dictionaries in the system
CONSYS.RESIZ    F       F                                        72
E.FILES
THISISALONGN    F       F                                        30
AME
INTEOD.UFD      F       F                                        28
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>By including certain special codes in your marker string, you
can further control how your breakpoints work. For instance, the
<code>'N'</code> token resets the page number to one after each
breakpoint. All the codes take this same form: a single letter in
single quotes. To use it, you'd enter the command <code>LIST
COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON "::::'N'" TYPE TOTAL SIZE BY TYPE</code>.</p>
<p>Other tokens include <code>'D'</code>, which suppresses the
breakpoint line if there's only one corresponding record (because
who needs to total one record?), and 'P' begins a new page for each
breakpoint value. Check out <code>BREAK.ON</code> in the UniVerse
documentation for a complete list: but these are the ones I tend to
use most often.</p>
<h2>Summarising your report</h2>
<p>If you are only interested in the break points themselves, and
not the individual records, you can summarise your report by adding
the word <code>DET.SUP</code> (short for 'detail suppress'). Note
that this has the effect of hiding the <code>@ID</code> column as
this is clearing particular to individual records, and not
breakpointed groups. The <code>DESC</code> field would be equally
meaningless in a report of this kind and I have omitted it:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON TYPE TOTAL SIZE BY
TYPE DET.SUP</strong></code></p>
<pre>
LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON TYPE TOTAL SIZE BY TYPE DET.SUP 11:11:09  08-19-99  PA
GE 1
TYPE    Length...

D             111
F           4,351
K           1,783
M             271
PA          4,032
PH            393
PQ            226
Q             117
R             688
S             569
V           8,607
X              63
        =========
           21,211

824 records listed.
&gt;
</pre>
<h2>Providing headers and footers</h2>
<p>So far, the text of the <code>LIST</code> command itself has
appeared as the heading of your enquiries. To apply your own
heading, add <code>HEADING "heading text"</code>:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE HEADING "My
COPY.OF.VOC report"</strong></code></p>
<pre>
My COPY.OF.VOC Report
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
PRINT.ADMIN     PA      Paragraph                                25
TEST.PARAGRA    PA      PA                                       64
PH
COMO            V       Verb - Control copying of                31
                        command output to files
NOHEAD          K       Keyword - Do not print a                  5
                        banner page
LT              K       Keyword - "Less Than" operator            3
BREAK.VERB      V       Verb - Enable or disable INTR,           12
                        STOP, SUSP, and BRK keys.
SUBO            V       Verb - Subtract OCTAL numbers            17
ALL.MATCH       K       Keyword - Specify that ALL                5
                        strings should match for
                        SEARCH/ESEARCH statement
INQUIRING       K       Keyword - Prompt for record               4
                        name
LIST.ME         S       Sentence - Return status of              11
                        all users with your login name
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>You can add footers similarly by adding <code>FOOTING "footer
text"</code>.</p>
<p>There are a number of special 'tokens' you can include in
headers and footers. They all appear between single quotes:</p>
<p><code>'P'</code> will include a page number.<br />
<code>'D'</code> will include the date.<br />
<code>'L'</code> will include a line break.<br />
<code>'G'</code> will expand to a string of spaces as long as any
other 'G' on the same line, and sufficient to make the complete
line cover the width of the page. This ludicrous explanation is
entirely correct and completely impossible to understand: the net
effect is to 'spread out' elements of a heading, so <code>HEADING
"'D''G'My Heading'G''P'"</code> will put the date on the extreme
left, the page number on the extreme right, and the words <code>My
Heading</code> equidistant between them.</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE DESC SIZE HEADING
"'D''G'COPY.OF.VOC Report'G''P'"</strong></code></p>
<pre>
08-19-99                         COPY.OF.VOC Report                         1
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
PRINT.ADMIN     PA      Paragraph                                25
TEST.PARAGRA    PA      PA                                       64
PH
COMO            V       Verb - Control copying of                31
                        command output to files
NOHEAD          K       Keyword - Do not print a                  5
                        banner page
LT              K       Keyword - "Less Than" operator            3
BREAK.VERB      V       Verb - Enable or disable INTR,           12
                        STOP, SUSP, and BRK keys.
SUBO            V       Verb - Subtract OCTAL numbers            17
ALL.MATCH       K       Keyword - Specify that ALL                5
                        strings should match for
                        SEARCH/ESEARCH statement
INQUIRING       K       Keyword - Prompt for record               4
                        name
LIST.ME         S       Sentence - Return status of              11
                        all users with your login name
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>You can also link your heading to your breakpoints, such that
each breakpoint value starts on a new page, and the breakpoint
value itself appears in the heading for that page. To do this, you
need to use one of <code>BREAK.ON</code>'s special codes (see
above) which I've not yet mentioned: <code>'B'</code>. This causes
the breakpoint value to appear in the heading. You also need to put
a <code>'B'</code> token into your heading, telling
<code>LIST</code> where to put the value.</p>
<p>This is one of those things that is harder to describe than to
do. Check over the <code>BREAK.ON</code> notes again, try the
following example, and you should get it:</p>
<p><code><strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON "'B'" TYPE DESC TOTAL
SIZE BY TYPE HEADING "Type 'B' records"</strong></code></p>
<pre>
Type D records
VOC.........    TYPE    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              D       Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                        any file
F7              D       Data descriptor for Field 7 of           11
                        any file
F1              D       Data descriptor for Field 1 of           11
                        any file
F2              D       Data descriptor for Field 2 of           11
                        any file
F4              D       Data descriptor for Field 4 of           11
                        any file
F5              D       Data descriptor for Field 5 of           11
                        any file
F6              D       Data descriptor for Field 6 of           11
                        any file
F10             D       Data descriptor for Field 10             12
                        of any file
F8              D       Data descriptor for Field 8 of           11
                        any file
F3              D       Data descriptor for Field 3 of           11
                        any file
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<p>It's redundant, of course, to show the 'D' type in the heading
and then again on ever row. To avoid it, use <code>BREAK.SUP</code>
(break on suppressing column) instead of <code>BREAK.ON</code>:</p>
<p><code><strong>LIST COPY.OF.VOC BREAK.ON "'B'" TYPE DESC TOTAL
SIZE BY TYPE HEADING "Type 'B' records"</strong></code></p>
<pre>
Type D records
VOC.........    DESC..........................    Length...

F9              Data descriptor for Field 9 of           11
                any file
F7              Data descriptor for Field 7 of           11
                any file
F1              Data descriptor for Field 1 of           11
                any file
F2              Data descriptor for Field 2 of           11
                any file
F4              Data descriptor for Field 4 of           11
                any file
F5              Data descriptor for Field 5 of           11
                any file
F6              Data descriptor for Field 6 of           11
                any file
F10             Data descriptor for Field 10             12
                of any file
F8              Data descriptor for Field 8 of           11
                any file
F3              Data descriptor for Field 3 of           11
                any file
Press any key to continue...
</pre>
<h2>Printing your enquiry</h2>
<p>To send your enquiry results to the printer instead of the
screen, add <code>LPTR</code> ('line printer') to your command, as
in <code>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE SIZE DESC LPTR</code>. This will
print to your 'default printer': which printer is your default
printer will depend on how your system adminstrator has configured
your system. Go and hassle him if you're in doubt.</p>
<p>If your system has many printers, you administrator may have set
up more than one UniVerse 'print channel'. Different channels can
route output to different printers or even to files on your disk.
They are created with the <code>SETPTR</code>, which we will
encounter later in these notes, and each one is numbered. If you
need to print to a channel other than the default (channel 0), add
the channel number to the end of your <code>LPTR</code> command, as
in <code>LIST COPY.OF.VOC TYPE SIZE DESC LPTR 2</code>.</p>

</body>
</html>
