<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Retrieve</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Retrieve' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, retrieve" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Retrieve</h1>
<p>During out discussion of file dictionaries above (see
<span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('dictionaries.html')">Dictionaries</span> above) you will
have seen a number of examples of RetrieVe at work, providing
simple listings of records.</p>
<p>We have, however, barely scratched the surface of RetrieVe's
abilities. It is one of those rare tools which manages to combine
simplicity in everyday use with the muscle to produce extensive and
highly complex reports when they are required: and to handle the
entire continuum between these extremes.</p>
<p>In this section, we shall take a closer look at the language,
learning sufficient to produce perhaps 80% of the reports required
by real clients within real systems.</p>
<p>Be aware, though, that RetrieVe has the power to handle most of
the other 20% too: when you get to the point where you need to
accomplish something which these notes do not describe, do not
assume that it cannot be achieved with Retrieve: consult UniVerse's
documentation first for the fine detail that you may require.</p>
<p>Bear in mind also that RetrieVe is closely integrated into the
rest of UniVerse. Sometimes, the effect you require may depend on
combining RetrieVe with other UniVerse tools: such as the creation
of a new I-descriptor which in turn calls a UniVerse Basic
subroutine to return the vital piece of information you need to
complete your report.</p>
<p>It is true that during your career you will occassionally
encounter reports which require hand coding using UniVerse Basic,
but if you find yourself reaching for the compiler to prepare
reports frequently, discipline yourself to ask first, for each
report, 'could I do this using RetrieVe?'.</p>
<p>UniVerse Basic, for all its strengths, is a general purpose
language. If you turn to it to write reports, you will not only
have to write the tricksy bits which you felt were beyond RetrieVe,
you'll have to write code to number pages, handle page breaks,
automatically adjust to different screen and paper widths, total,
average, sort... all the things you get with RetrieVe 'for
free'.</p>

</body>
</html>
