<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Record
Commands</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Record Commands' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, record, commands" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Record Commands</h1>
<h2>COUNT</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: COUNT filename</strong></p>
<p>Counts the records in <code>filename</code>.</p>
<h2>CT</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: CT filename recordkey</strong></p>
<p>Displays a record on the screen (stands for 'Copy to Terminal').
If you don't want to actually change a record, saves you loading up
the editor just to see what's in it: and eliminates the risk that
you'll accidentally change it.</p>
<h2>CP</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: CP filename recordkey</strong></p>
<p>As <code>CT</code>, but sends the output to the default
printer.</p>
<h2>COPY</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: COPY FROM filename1 TO filename2 recordkey1
recordkey2...<br />
<em>or</em> COPY FROM filename1 TO filename2 ALL</strong></p>
<p>The first syntax shown here copies <code>recordkey1</code> and
<code>recordkey2</code> from <code>filename1</code> to
<code>filename2</code>: unless, that is, records by these keys
already exist on <code>filename2</code>, in which case they are not
overwritten. The second command works the same way, but copies
<em>all</em> of <code>filename1</code>'s records.</p>
<p>To copy the records even if it means overwriting, add the word
<code>OVERWRITING</code> to your command. To remove the records
which get copied from <code>filename1</code> (effectively
<em>moving</em> the records) add <code>DELETING</code>. Finally,
copying a lot of records can take a while, and watching a flashing
cursor for a minute or more makes me nervous. To get feedback of
the record keys as they're copied, add <code>SQUAWK</code>.</p>
<h2>CNAME</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: CNAME oldfilename TO newfilename<br />
<em>or</em> CNAME filename oldrecordkey, newrecordkey</strong></p>
<p>The first syntax changes the name of a file: changes both the
key of the file pointer record in the <code>VOC</code> and the name
of the corresponding UNIX files.</p>
<p>The second syntax changes the key of a record in the file.</p>
<h2>EXCHANGE</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: EXCHANGE filename recordkey1
recordkey2</strong></p>
<p>OK, so this is not a command you will use every day, but I like
it. This record swaps the contents of two records.</p>
<h2>DELETE</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: DELETE filename recordkey1
recordkey2...</strong></p>
<p>Deletes records from a file. Will also work with a select list:
just build your list and type <code>DELETE filename</code>.</p>
<h2>CLEAR.FILE</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: CLEAR.FILE filename</strong></p>
<p>Removes all the records from a file. Better than deleting them
all as it reinitialises the file, collecting all wasted space and
so on. The command works from a select list: this is not a
recommendation but a warning, for if you do a
<code>CLEAR.FILE</code> with an active select list it will look for
files with names like those in your list and clear them if it finds
them.</p>

</body>
</html>
