<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Terminal
Commands</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Terminal Commands' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, terminal, commands" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Terminal Commands</h1>
<h2>SET.TERM.TYPE</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: SET.TERM.TYPE terminalname</strong></p>
<p>In order to properly control your display, UniVerse must know
what kind of terminal you are using. Each terminal must be sent
different sets of 'instruction strings' to do things like clear the
screen, position the cursor, and so on. If you were using a DEC
VT100 terminal you'd enter the command <code>SET.TERM.TYPE
VT100</code>. You'd enter the same command, of course, if you were
using a terminal which <em>emulated</em> a VT100, or a PC based
'terminal emulator' in VT100 mode.</p>
<p>To see the list of terminal types supported by your UniVerse
installation, enter the <code>SET.TERM.TYPE</code> command without
a terminal name. When you are prompted for one, enter a
<code>?</code>, and the names will be listed.</p>
<p>Some terminals, and most terminal emulators, can display a range
of screen sizes other than the ubiquitous 80 columns by 24 rows. To
persuade UniVerse to make use of the extra space in displaying
enquiry results and so forth, enter the command <code>SET.TERM.TYPE
WIDTH numberofcols LENGTH numberofrows</code>. You can also add the
<code>WIDTH</code> and <code>LENGTH</code> keywords after the
terminal name and thus set the terminal type, and its dimensions,
in a single command.</p>
<p>The <code>SET.TERM.TYPE</code> command is often included in
<code>LOGIN</code> paragraphs (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('voc-login.html')">LOGIN, ON.EXIT and ON.ABORT</span>):
complete with a terminal name if the developer knows the kind of
terminal his users will be using, and without if he does not (so
that they will be prompted to choose one).</p>
<h2>GET.TERM.TYPE</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: GET.TERM.TYPE</strong></p>
<p>Sister command to <code>SET.TERM.TYPE</code>, displays the
current terminal type, width and length settings.</p>
<h2>PTERM</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: PTERM settingname setting</strong></p>
<p>Use <code>PTERM</code> to define your terminal settings. To get
a complete list of possible <code>settingname</code> values, simply
type <code>PTERM</code>, and they will all be displayed along with
their current values. By far the most import is <code>PTERM ERASE
(press erase key)</code>, which will define the key use wish to use
to 'backspace' over mistyped characters. If you try <code>PTERM
ERASE</code>..., and see the message <code>PTERM: Option 'ERASE'
requires an argument</code>, it means that whatever key you pressed
is <em>already</em> defined as the erase key, and effectively
erased the space after the <code>ERASE</code> rather than being
passed to <code>PTERM</code> as a parameter: in other words, you
needn't worry.</p>
<h2>CS</h2>
<p><strong>Syntax: CS</strong></p>
<p>Clears the screen.</p>

</body>
</html>
