<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: The TCL Command
Language</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: The TCL Command Language' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, the, tcl, command, language" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> The TCL Command Language</h1>
<p>The UniVerse command language, called <em>TCL</em> under a
number of PICK systems and <em>PERFORM</em> under Prime
INFORMATION, was introduced very near the beginning of this course
(see <span class="link" onclick="_goto('prompt.html')">The Command
Prompt</span>).</p>
<p>Strictly speaking, TCL incorporates all the UniVerse commands
shipped with UniVerse (as opposed to you add to the VOC file). Many
of these have already been described fully in earlier sections: for
instance, see<span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('files.html')">Universe Files</span> for
<code>CREATE.FILE</code>, <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('retrieve-list.html')">Listing Records</span> for
<code>LIST</code>, and <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('records-ed.html')&quot;">The Editor - ED</span> for, well,
<code>ED</code>. <em>This</em> section introduces what I believe to
be the best of the rest: the most common and useful commands not
already mentioned. It makes no attempt to be comprehensive. For
more specialised commands, and technically complete descriptions of
each command, refer to the UniVerse documentation. This selection,
though, will get you up and running confidently much more quickly
than the sometimes ponderous reference guides.</p>
<p>Many commands have a number of different syntaxes, which allow
them to do a number of different things: I haven't tried to show
them all, again I focus on the most common and useful ones. Some of
the uses are far from intuitive and are easy to tie yourself into
knots with. For instance, here is an example <code>COPY</code>
command:</p>
<p><code>COPY FROM INVOICES TO OLD.INVOICES 0001 0002</code></p>
<p>Now, even before reading the documentation, it'll be pretty
clear that this copies records <code>0001</code> and
<code>0002</code> from the <code>INVOICES</code> file to the
<code>OLD.INVOICES</code> file. Now look at:</p>
<p><code>COPY FROM INVOICES TO OLD.INVOICES 0003,0004</code></p>
<p>Would you have guessed that this copies only one record, and
then changes its key? And if both commands were in the same
paragraph can you be sure that you, and future maintenance
programmers, would notice the vital comma in the second
command?</p>
<p>More computer time and utility is lost through bugs and
maintenance work than is recovered by tiny performance
improvements. Rather than use the 'copy and rename' version of
<code>COPY</code>, recast the second command as follows:</p>
<p><code>COPY FROM INVOICES TO OLD.INVOICES 0003<br />
CNAME OLD.INVOICES 0003,0004</code></p>
<p>It's difficult to imagine anyone misunderstanding this.</p>

</body>
</html>
