<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Sentences</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Sentences' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, sentences" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Sentences</h1>
<p>A sentence is basically just a paragraph (see <span class="link"
onclick="_goto('voc-paragraphs.html')">Paragraphs</span> above)
with only one command.</p>
<p>Compare...</p>
<p><code>&gt;ED VOC TEST.PA<br />
New Record.<br />
<br />
----: I<br />
0001= PA<br />
0002= DISPLAY Hello mum!<br />
0003=<br />
Bottom at line 2.<br />
----: FI<br />
"TEST.PA" filed in file "VOC".<br />
&gt;TEST.PA<br />
Hello mum!</code></p>
<p>...with...</p>
<p><code>&gt;ED VOC TEST.S<br />
New Record.<br />
<br />
----: I<br />
0001= S<br />
0002= DISPLAY Hello mum!<br />
0003=<br />
Bottom at line 2.<br />
----: FI<br />
"TEST.S" filed in file "VOC".<br />
&gt;TEST.S<br />
Hello mum!</code></p>
<p>The results are identical. In fact, there are only two
differences between sentences and paragraphs:</p>
<p>1. Any parameters entered after the sentence name on the
UniVerse command line are automatically added to the end of the
command in the sentence before it is executed.</p>
<p>Using the paragraph and sentence created above, compare the
command...</p>
<p><code>TEST.PA ...and dad!<br />
Hello mum!</code></p>
<p>...with...</p>
<p><code>TEST.S ...and dad!<br />
Hello mum! ...and dad!</code></p>
<p>The sentence automatically appended the parameters <code>...and
dad!</code> to its <code>DISPLAY</code> command before executing.
To read the command parameters in the paragraph, you would have had
to use in-line prompts (see <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('voc-paragraphs.html')">Paragraphs</span> above).</p>
<p><strong>2. Sentences simply ignore all commands after the
first.</strong></p>
<p>Compare...</p>
<p><code>&gt;ED VOC TEST.PA.2<br />
New Record.<br />
<br />
----: I<br />
0001= PA<br />
0002= DISPLAY Hello mum!<br />
0003= DISPLAY Hello dad!<br />
0004=<br />
Bottom at line 3.<br />
----: FI<br />
"TEST.PA.2" filed in file "VOC".<br />
&gt;TEST.PA.2<br />
Hello mum!<br />
Hello dad!</code></p>
<p>...with...</p>
<p><code>&gt;ED VOC TEST.S.2<br />
New Record.<br />
<br />
----: I<br />
0001= S<br />
0002= DISPLAY Hello mum!<br />
0003= DISPLAY Hello dad!<br />
0004=<br />
Bottom at line 3.<br />
----: FI<br />
"TEST.S.2" filed in file "VOC&amp;quot.<br />
&gt;TEST.S.2<br />
Hello mum!</code></p>
<p>Note that while the paragraph displayed both messages, the
sentence only displayed the first.</p>

</body>
</html>
