<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Keywords</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Keywords' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, keywords" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Keywords</h1>
<p><strong>Keywords</strong> are generally parameters or modifiers
applied to verbs. We came across one when we examined the
<code>CREATE.FILE filename DYNAMIC</code> command, as
<code>DYNAMIC</code> is a keyword.</p>
<p>Editing a keyword reveals the following:</p>
<p><code>ED VOC DYNAMIC<br />
2 lines long.<br />
<br />
----: P<br />
0001: K<br />
0002: 241<br />
----:</code></p>
<p>The number in the second field is provided to whichever verb is
being run, which understands it and modifies its behaviour
accordingly. As keywords work by numbers in this way, they are not
terribly interesting to edit.</p>
<p>One peculiarity, though, is that some words which are usually
used as keywords may also be used as verbs in their own right. An
example is the <code>DISPLAY</code> command we have used in many
examples to date. The <code>VOC</code> record for
<code>DISPLAY</code> looks like this:</p>
<p><code>ED VOC DISPLAY<br />
3 lines long.<br />
<br />
----: P<br />
0001: K<br />
0002: 258<br />
0003: DISPLAY.VERB<br />
----:</code></p>
<p>This indicates that the word <code>DISPLAY</code> has two
entirely separate uses. If used as a keyword following some other
verb, it is keyword 258: and it is up to the verb in question what
to do if this keyword is specified. On the other hand, if used as a
command in its own right, as in <code>DISPLAY Hello mum!</code>,
the UniVerse command on the third line is executed instead. Editing
this in turn reveals an ordinary verb.</p>
<p><code>ED VOC DISPLAY.VERB<br />
4 lines long.<br />
<br />
----: P<br />
0001: V<br />
0002: DISPLAY<br />
0003: I<br />
0004: GHNK<br />
----:</code></p>

</body>
</html>
