<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Strict//EN"
    "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-strict.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml">
<head>
<meta name="generator" content=
"HTML Tidy for Linux (vers 25 March 2009), see www.w3.org" />
<title>www.mannyneira.com: Computers: Universe: Other VOC
Records</title>
<meta name="author" content="Manny Neira" />
<meta name="description" content=
"'Computers: Universe: Other VOC Records' - a page from www.mannyneira.com (the mysterious utility wizard), Manny Neira's personal website." />
<meta name="keywords" content=
"manny, neira, personal, website, the, mysterious, utility, wizard, computers, universe, other, voc, records" />






</head>
<body>

<h1><span class="path">Computers:
Universe:</span> Other VOC Records</h1>
<p>In addition to the types of VOC record we have discussed, you
will come across a number of others, which I will list briefly here
chiefly for the sake of completeness.</p>
<h2>Menu pointers: M</h2>
<p>VOC records with <code>M</code> as the first character of their
first fields are <em>menu pointers</em>, used to invoke UniVerse
menus. To see them explained, turn to <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('tcl-menus.html')">Menus of Commands</span>.</p>
<h2>'Global' dictionary records: D, I, PH, etc.</h2>
<p>As has been briefly mentioned, records in the dictionary of a
UniVerse file are used to describe the contents or layout of the
main or data records. Their main use is to name and describe the
fields available via the Retrieve query language. For instance, the
record <code>CUSTOMER.NUMBER</code> in the dictionary of an
<code>INVOICES</code> file allows the term
<code>CUSTOMER.NUMBER</code> to appear in Retrieve enquiries based
on that file. Some dictionary records, though, could apply to many
files: for instance, a dictionary item called
<code>RECORD.LENGTH</code> reporting the length of a record in
bytes could be useful, and no matter what fields are stored in a
record, every record has a particular length. To avoid having to
set up dictionary items such as <code>RECORD.LENGTH</code> in every
dictionary, you can save them instead in the VOC file, where
Retrieve will be able to use them regardless of the file you are
enquiring about. For more information about dictionary records,
turn to <span class="link" onclick=
"_goto('dictionaries.html')">Dictionaries</span>.</p>
<h2>'Data' records: 'X'</h2>
<p>A few VOC records exist simply to store information or
configuration details, rather than to support the UniVerse command
language. These have an <code>X</code> at their beginning of their
first field. One example, which you will find in every UniVerse
account, is:</p>
<p><code>&gt;<strong>ED VOC RELLEVEL</strong><br />
4 lines long.<br />
<br />
----: <strong>P</strong><br />
0001: X<br />
0002: 9.4.1.1<br />
0003: INFORMATION<br />
0004: INFORMATION.FORMAT<br />
Bottom at line 4.<br />
----: <strong>Q</strong><br />
&gt;</code></p>
<p>Field 2 stores the release of UniVerse, and fields 3 and 4
define the 'flavour' of the UniVerse account (see <span class=
"link" onclick="_goto('about.html')">UniVerse and PICK</span>
above),</p>
<p><code>X</code> type VOC records should be used sparingly, or
(preferably) not at all. The VOC file is central to the function
and performance of the UniVerse account. Every additional
<code>X</code> type makes the file larger and possibly slower to
access, and removes a 'word' which would otherwise have been
available to the UniVerse command language. If you find yourself
planning many <code>X</code> type records, consider setting up a
separate UniVerse file to store them, rather than littering the VOC
with them.</p>

</body>
</html>
